---
layout: post
title: "CS 448B Data Visualizations Final Project: Analyzing Newspaper Visual Content From the World War Era"
---
Lucy Bell, Janelle Rudolph, Amy Tang

### About The Dataset:
The Newspaper Navigator dataset includes different types of visual content from historical newspapers from 1850 to 1963. The visual content is recognized and categorized using a machine learning object detection model which can recognize the following categories: Photograph, Illustration, Map, Comics/Cartoon, Editorial Cartoon, Headline, Advertisement. The dataset also includes textual information about the visual content itself, such as text content of a headline also compiled by the object detection model. There is also metadata regarding geographical location, newspaper information, dates, etc.

### Our Focus:
After thoroughly examining the dataset, we were most interested in photographs, advertisements, and headlines. By honing in on these three categories, we began to develop a consistent narrative focused around wartime. This article includes multiple interactive visualizations in order to accurately convey newspaper content from 1900-1946 and hone in on patterns that arose.

In the early 20th century, newspapers were the primary way of shaping public opinon and providing communication on local and world events. In wartime, they served not only as a source of news but also as a tool for government messaging and societal persuasion. The visual content within these newspapers reflects both the priorities and constraints of the time, offering unique insights into historical events and cultural shifts.
  
<iframe width="100%" height="825" frameborder="0"
  src="https://observablehq.com/embed/07f0cb22ca7ec1cd?cells=viewof+toggleCharts"></iframe>
 This visualization displays the proportion of ad types from the years 1914-1918 & 1939-1946, wartime of WW1 and WW2. By pressing the button in the upper left we can also see a chart with the years 1900-1913 and 1919-1938, peacetime. Toggling the different pie charts can allow the viewer to dynamically see the changes between the two time periods and movement of advertisement slices.
 
 __Try to hover over each pie slice to see an example of an ad that is in that category!__ We can use this to compare the popularity of ad types in war and out of war. We can see that fashion is the most popular ad type both in wartime and in peacetime, with home ads coming in close second, and food in third. It is interesting to see the differences in the rest of the ad types in war and out of war.

 During wartime, advertising focuses on essentials like food, home needs, and services. This reflects the eras priorities such as rationing, healthcare, and stability. Fashion remains relevant but emphasizes practicality, while transportation and entertainment ads decline due to resource conservation and limited leisure activities. In peacetime, the focus shifts toward consumerism, with fashion and home ads dominating as people invest in luxury goods and improvements. Food ads decrease in prominence as rationing ends, and transportation and entertainment ads recover, reflecting increased mobility and leisure activities. Overall, wartime ads highlight necessity and resilience, while peacetime ads reflect prosperity and consumerism.
 During wartime, advertising focuses on essentials like food, home needs, and services. This reflects the eras priorities such as rationing, healthcare, and stability. Fashion remains relevant but emphasizes practicality, while transportation and entertainment ads decline due to resource conservation and limited leisure activities. In peacetime, the focus shifts toward consumerism, with fashion and home ads dominating as people invest in luxury goods and improvements. Food ads decrease in prominence as rationing ends, and transportation and entertainment ads recover, reflecting increased mobility and leisure activities. Overall, wartime ads highlight necessity and resilience, while peacetime ads reflect prosperity and consumerism.

 __By clicking on the fashion category, you are also able to see the difference in men and women targeted fashion ads. Can you estimate the proportions for both time periods?__ During wartime, fashion advertisements often focused more on men, reflecting their central role in the war effort and the influence of military styles on civilian attire. Ads for men highlighted durable, practical clothing like uniforms, sturdy suits, and boots, emphasizing patriotism and resilience. Women’s fashion during these periods was often constrained by fabric rationing, leading to simpler, utilitarian designs and fewer advertisements. In contrast, peacetime brought a shift toward women’s fashion as America sought to rebuild normalcy, with ads celebrating femininity, elegance, and luxury. Economic recovery allowed for greater spending on elaborate styles and accessories, and women, as key household consumers, became the primary target for fashion marketers. Men’s fashion ads during peacetime declined in prominence, focusing instead on leisure and business attire. These shifts reflect the broader social and economic dynamics of wartime and peacetime, as well as evolving gender roles and priorities.
  
<iframe width="100%" height="1000" frameborder="0"
  src="https://observablehq.com/embed/18965aada07599a0@1307?cells=viewof+state"></iframe>

This visualization complements the broader narrative by focusing on how headlines reflected public discourse and priorities during a time of significant societal transformation. By __displaying the top keyword for each state in a given year__, it provides a snapshot of the themes and concerns that public attention in different environments across the United States. The ability to __select specific years in the upper-left dropdown__ allows you to explore how key historical events like World War I, the Great Depression, and World War II influenced the national narrative depending on where you were. Overall, we noted more wartime/crisis terminology during periods of war, including references to presidents and other political leaders in states of key leadership. Additionally, viewers can __click on states to view the amount of publications in a certain state__ and see how the national ratio of news changes over this period of time. 

The inclusion of publication counts per state adds more context to the analysis by showcasing the relative prominence of different states in shaping national discourse. States with higher counts, like New York or Michigan, often had cities that acted as media hubs, like New York City or Detroit, showing their influence broader cultural and political narratives. Conversely, states with lower counts offer insights into localized concerns that might not been heard by the national audience. We can also view how publication counts in this dataset declined sharply after the Great Depression, aligning with the project's broader look into how economic challenges like the Great Depression reduced overall newspaper resources, as evidenced by the decline in visual content such as photographs during this period as well as the decline in headlines. (We also consider that perhaps existing content was damaged and not easily formmated into this dataset, maybe providing another explanation for the drastic gaps in the map in years after the Great Depression)

Overall, this headline-focused visualization provides another layer of analysis, showing how regional and temporal differences in textual content contributed to shaping the American wartime and peacetime experience, depending on where you were.

<iframe width="100%" height="741" frameborder="0"
  src="https://observablehq.com/embed/@amy5/cs448b-final-project-experiment@1589?cells=lineChart"></iframe>

This visualization tracks the frequency of mentions of 5 major world powers - Britain, France, Germany, Japan, and Russia -- in newspaper photos from 1900 to 1946. I chose these countries because they were some of the most prominent countries involved in the World Wars outside of the United States. The data is presented as a line graph with years on the x-axis and mention counts on the y-axis. The graph has annotations for peaks in the graph such as the Russo-Japanese War and pivotal historical moments such as the start and end of the world wars and the great depression. __Viewers can hover over the annotations to see a blurb with additional detailed historical context. Viewers can also hover over points to see the exact count for any country in any particular year. Points for annotated years also display images in the tooltip.__ 

*Noticeable insights:* The most striking feature of the visualization was the dramatic difference in coverage volume between the 1910s and later decades. France reached nearly 5,500 mention at WW1's conclusion in 1918 while maximum mentions in the 1940s barely reached 500. This was largely caused by economic challenges in the early 1920s followed by the Great Depression. In the early 1920s, price volatility and deflation cause a sharp decline in advertising revenue. This caused what could be considered unnecessary such as photos to be removed from newspapers. Therefore, despite WWII's massive historical significance, the number of images about other countries was significantly reduced. For country specific patterns, France and Germany show the most dramatic spikes during WW1 due to their heavy involvment on opposing sides of the war. Japan and Russia maintain relatively stable, lower levels of coverage except for their brief spike during the Russo-Japanese War.

### Overall Project Takeaways:
Though our visualizations answer different questions and focus on different types of visual content, it is clear that the majors events during this time period (the World Wars and the Great Depression) changed what people focused on and what types of visual contents were being shown in the visualizations. Not only did the quantity of news media drop suddenly after the 1920s, we can see that the attention of US citizens was increasingly focused on more practical concepts, a fact reflected in the ad and general news content made to appeal to them. With regards to location effects, we can also see that war and socioeconomic struggles like the Great Depression have varied effects depending on the geographical and potential urban/rural domination of your community, seen in the differences of priorities across the country when faced with a crisis. In conclusion, we can also generally see that though a war may occur abroad, it has far-reaching local impacts, and is a phenomenon that affects the daily life of every citizen.
